Title: Avni 2021 Update
Author: Kurund Jalmi
Date: January 2022
Category: Avni
URL: https://projecttech4dev.org/avni-2021-update/
==================================================

2021 has been a year of mixed emotions going through Wave 2 of the pandemic, hopes from the availability of vaccines and then again the scare of a new wave. As we went through this, Avni product and community has both consolidated and grown. Read on to know more.
Usage and Impact
We saw an overall
100% increase in the system usage from last year
, which means double the number of services rendered!
Utility in Covid ????
Last year
SATHI
used Avni to roll out surveys to collect information from ASHAs, Anganwadi workers and health committee members of 28 blocks from 13 districts of Maharashtra. This year we saw multiple organisations using Avni in their projects dealing with the pandemic.
Shelter Associates
tracks vaccination status and interest in getting vaccinated in the households of urban slums of Mumbai, Pune and Kolhapur.
ASHWINI Gudalur
set up Avni to help their call centre team to record updates from follow up with all positive cases in the tribal community they serve. The information is available to be seen by doctors in the hospital.
Rythu Swaraj Vedika
used Avni to help their volunteers do the needs assessment in their community villages, to get prepared for an impending third wave.
MahaPecoNet
used Avni to track the relief and awareness activities which reached more than 5 million people in Maharashtra.
Watch this webinar conducted where different organisations share about this
Webinar: Avni During Covid
Scale ups by existing Users
In 2021, multiple organisations decided to scale up their projects and Avni played an important role in helping them do so.
Rejuvenating Water Bodies
driven by Caring friends, ATE Chandra Foundation and IIT-IIT was scaled up in 3 states of Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Karnataka. Volunteers and members from 13+ NGOs used Avni to record daily desilting work and distribution of silt to farmers. In 2022 the project plans to further scale up covering newer states.
Jan Swasthya Sahyog scaled up the
Sickle cell screening project
to another district in Madhya Pradesh.
JNPCT
app was earlier used by supervisors and is now rolled out to Arogya Saheli, their frontline ASHA like workers.
Avni for Offline Stock Management
Swasthya Swaraj
works in rural Odisha running community health centres in 3 remote locations. It gets difficult to manage the drug stock using paper based registers. Missing out on returning expiring drugs and ensuring stock is replenished at right levels is challenging. An offline digital system was desired. We built a new android application using the Avni platform to help solve the problem. The pilot is successfully completed and it is all set to go live with the new year.
New additions to family
Save the Children
joined the Avni users’ family as they rolled out the app in their Assam tea plantation project to protect children from labour, trafficking and other vulnerabilities.
Saahas
is all set to roll out Avni to their project managers across 20+ projects on sustainable waste management to track their key success indicators.
Kaivalya Education Foundation
would be using Avni to track attendance and engagement with children, imparting them life and employability skills as part of the YW NXT project.
Avni Capabilities
Based on demand from the users and need on the ground we continued to add more features to the product. Avni now supports
Custom extensions
to plugin your own web application for use cases like report card and ID card prints.
?
Approval workflow
, ????
Phone number verification
, ?????
File data types
were added to improve the quality of data while ????
Draft save
, ????
News broadcast
, ????
Custom icons
improve the usability and engagement. We continued to review and improve on security and scalability.
Other Updates
ASHWINI now has Avni integrated into their hospital management system Bahmni. The data seamlessly flows both ways. This will provide a holistic picture of each patient and better continuum of care for patients. We anticipate more such integrations with newer platforms in 2022.
We conducted a few webinars where our partner organisations shared their learnings from the ground. The webinars received good participation and engagement. Do check out
Avni s webinar playlist.
Given the current times, you may find ????
Community based work and COVID19 : Learnings from the ground
very relevant.
Going with the open source spirit, the Avni team participated in a 2 day
FOSS hackathon
to build a prototype for
Canned Analytics
and won a prize too! ???? The prototype is rolled out to a few users and we are getting good feedback. We plan to work further on this feature in the coming year.
Avni won a grant ???? from Zerodha and
FOSS United
to build Rule designer which would be a major step in enabling nonprofits to design their application without having to write code. We would be starting on this as the new year 2022 begins.
In 2021, 76% of Avni expenses came from project revenue, with most of the product capabilities growth supported by existing and new users.The deficit was filled by grants.
We also have a brand new short video introducing Avni, ???? Yay!!!! Do check it out.
In 2021, all of the Avni core team members continued to work remotely from their hometowns staying closer to the family.
We d like to use this opportunity to thank all those who have been with us in this journey – our users, partners, funders and well-wishers. Together we will continue to cross new milestones.
As the risk of a new wave due to Omicron stares at all of us,
we wish you, your family and the communities you serve a very safe 2022.
Read the original post on Avni website here
.