Title: FundImpact – Product Roadmap FAQs
Author: Kurund Jalmi
Date: March 2020
Category: Tech4Dev project Updates
URL: https://projecttech4dev.org/fundimpact-product-roadmap-faqs/
==================================================

Vision
of the Platform
What is the larger purpose of the Platform?
The larger purpose
of the FundImpact is to empower organizations in addressing the transparency
and accountability with regards to Statuary compliances, Donor Awareness and
Internal Audits. It enables organizations to take data driven decision making
and measure the impact it is delivering.
FundImpact provides
off-the shelf features that are easy to implement and serves the basic needs of
the NGOs (i.e. tracking funding from Donors/Funders and tagging very high level
activities (milestones) against it.
How will the platform be positioned as compared to
bespoke platforms offering similar functionality with freemium models?
The core philosophy
of the platform is to provide free and opensource solution that is highly
modular and extensible. The organizations can use the base platform and extend
the functionality tailor made to their requirements and workflow.
The vision is not
force fit a particular workflow or data structure of the freemium solutions in
the market but to facilitate organization with core set of tools that can be
further extended to a project management tool, leads management, survey tool,
impact assessment, etc.
Will it be a complete package of ERP for NPOs?
The platform has a
very specific purpose to help organizations keep track of funding from donors
and measure activities against a set of impact indicators. The platform will be
extensible enough to plug into other solutions or applications through APIs to
perform workflow driven data entry operations or reporting. (For, example,
integration with Project Management tool to keep track of Project Activities,
Integration with Billing Apps to keep tracks of accounting)
Accounting
How do we address different accounting practices to
track funds?
FundImpact will be
shipped with Minimal Viable Features with regards to management of Funds. We
are tracking funding support at an aggregate level and not at granular level
for each bill or expense. It will give a snapshot for three main indicators –
Funds Committed by donors, Funds received by organization and Funds Utilized by
the organization for each project/portfolio.
For accounting
purposes, it is best that the organization sticks to its accounting packages
and use its APIs to integrate the FundImpact and fetch relevant data points.
Is it going to be an accounting software?
No, FundImpact is
not intended to be an Accounting package. It is helping organizations
(specially project managers and fund managers) keep track of the current status
of the projects undertaken by the organization by reporting Fund and Activity
status.
Will it integrate with accounting packages like Tally?
Yes, the platform
will be designed to fetch relevant data points from 3rd party applications. As
of now, we haven’t thought of providing off the shelf support to any of these
accounting packages.
How will it help the accounts department? They already
have a financial tools in place and extensively use Excel or Tally for their
work.
The platform is
intended to facilitate better communication between accounts/finance department
and rest of the team in the organization. The accounts personnel can upload
audited/approved numbers of funds to the platform. The same can be
accessed/tracked by the other team members through project dashboards.
The platform is not
designed to provide features for accounting workflows (like double entry system
or approvals/audits of payments/funds or budgeting). These operations can be
continued on the existing tools (like Excel, Tally)
Project
Management
How will the platform serve the difference management
practices and approaches in the organization?
FundImpact is not
designed to be used a project management tool. The product will be shipped with
Minimal Viable Features to track project deliverables as committed in the MoU
or against funds allocated.
The project managers
can use any of the 3rd party applications outside the FundImpact to assign
tasks to team members and time track their deliverables.
Is it a project management Tool?
FundImpact captures
and tracks the project deliverables and not individual members tasks. It is
therefore not designed to be used as a Project Management Tool for managers to
oversee implementation of a plan or deliverables of the individual team members.
It is more like tracker for high level project deliverables (like activities
committed under the MoU)
The platform will
give a high level dashboard of various projects categorized under different
portfolios (Workspaces) for the managers and team members to review/track where
the projects are heading. They can get a high level view of target vs actual on
Funding and Committed Activities.
Will it be a reporting tool?
In a very broad
sense, the FundImpact platform can be used a reporting tool to display high
level indicators for the project (e.g. No of centres established, No of
training camps organized, Funds received till date, Funds utilized till date,
etc)
The dashboards will
generate relevant reports at four Levels – Deliverable Card (group of time
bound activities), Project, Workspaces (Portfolio) and at organization level.
Can this be used as a survey tool? Who will enter
project data on the tool?
The FundImpact is
not designed to capture survey data or enter granual details for a project
activities. It is intended for the project managers to enter the aggregated
details of the project activities (the target deliverables of the project, like
no. of health camps organized).
Will this act like a document repository for the
projects?
The FundImpact
captures the high level indicators of a project for tracking purpose. It is not
intended to be used as document repository for various projects in the
organization. Although we can upload attachments as reference documents.
Will this tool serve like a contracts management for
the organization? (Managing and monitoring contracts/MoU)?
Contracts management
is workflow driven application which requires custom logic and approach to
manage various leads and prospect projects. The FundImpact is not intended to
be used for prospecting projects or donors.
Impact
Measurement
How will we measure impact?
The high level
indicators captured through activities (deliverables) gives us primary data to
evaluate impact of a particular project or activity. The organization can tag
multiple indicators to such activities as probable outcomes/impact. For,
example a project activity of “Organizing 
WASH campaigns” can be tagged with the impact indicator of health,
school education.
This way
organization is able to keep track of various impact areas it is able to work
on and are measured through (target values of activities and allocation of
funds.) For example, Dashboard will give an overall figure to the organization
like “Investments influencing child health”, “No. of villages
where SDG4 was addressed”.
In our approach,
Impact Measurement should be taken as portfolio management across most common
indicators of various projects.
What impact framework will we be using? Can the
organization create their own?
The FundImpact
doesn’t propose any impact framework. Rather it supports capturing of primary
data and categorizing the data into relevant form before the organization can
process it using any of the impact frameworks. The FundImpact facilitates the
aggregation and structuring of the data as per organization’s strategy and
requirements by allowing them to categorize/tag project activities into
attributable impact indicator.