Title: Progress on READ project
Author: Kurund Jalmi
Date: April 2019
Category: Tech4Dev project Updates
URL: https://projecttech4dev.org/progress-on-read-project/
==================================================

The
initial engagement with four NGOs, implementing READ program in Pune,
helped us understand the commonalities and differences in their way
of functioning
Before
jumping to the solution we proposed for READ, it is important to
understand the way, READ program is implemented at these NGOs. To
give you an essence of it, here?s a quick overview of the program ?
At
	the start of the academic year, the NGOs, lay down their time tables
	for various classes in various schools (Both Doorstep and Swadhar
	work in close collaboration with schools, and have a session
	scheduled every week for each primary standard class in the school)
And
	during each of these session, the NGO teacher (Doorstep calls it
	Pustak Pari or Book Fairy), does a lot of work from taking
	attendance, to conducting games which would keep the child engaged
	throughout the session, to interacting with every child, and later
	after getting back home, putting down comments / notes for every
	child in a ledger.
Besides,
	the NGOs also plan evaluation of every child at regular intervals.
	So, the Pustak Pari has a task of noting down these evaluations in a
	separate ledger.
At
	some later point of time, a data entry person at the respective NGO,
	then keys in data in all different ledgers into Excel files. The
	NGOs then use the Excel data, as per their taste, to get different
	reports.
Based on above gist, the functioning of the program involves a lot of data capture by the NGO teacher. And this data is very crucial for READ, as it helps them, analyze the difference they are bringing into reading ability of each child.
Based
on above gist, the functioning of the program involves a lot of data
capture by the NGO teacher. And this data is very crucial for READ,
as it helps them, analyze the difference they are bringing into
reading ability of each child.
So,
we concluded, that the way we could intervene in READ program and
improve their work was, to eradicate manual data capture. Thereby, we
decided to build a solution consisting of 2 parts.
Android app ? for data entry and
Website ? for planning weekly sessions, storing school information along with funders and managing the NGO user for various operations.
Android
App
The
android app, is aimed mainly at the NGO teachers (or Book Fairies).
The Book Fairy could use the app, either in her class, or after
reaching home, in an offline mode, to make her notes/evaluations for
every child.
And,
when the app comes into network connectivity, it would automatically
sync the data with the server.
Website
The
second part of the solution was website.
The
website would be used for ?
Setting
	up NGOs, their users, and the tasks each user can perform.
Storing
	school information, along with some specifics like, is it a co-ed
	school, does it fall under PMC etc. which is later on used for both
	data analysis as well as applying for funding.
Laying
	down timetable for every school?s every class, for the entire
	academic year.
Maintaining
	an inventory of books used during the sessions as well as those used
	for home lending.
And
	reporting at various levels ? like reporting at the NGO level to
	analyze their progress across various schools, wards etc., reporting
	at the READ program level to get an idea of what methodology is
	making READ achieve its vision of developing reading abilities in a
	child. And lastly there also are reports for funders.
When
architecting the technology solutions for READ, one important
decision we made was to provide multi-lingual support for both the
app as well the website. This was considering the fact that, the Book
fairies, who are the main source of data collection, as well as other
set of users, who would be interacting with the site on a day-to-day
basis, may not necessarily be well versed with English. So, not just
the captions on the website / app would supporting Marathi, but the
teachers would be able to make all the data entry as well in Marathi.
However, we decided that numbers would be entered in English, so that
the analysis becomes easier later.
Challenges
faced ?
True
that the solution we provide, would be beneficial to multiple NGOs,
implementing the READ program. But, involvement of multiple NGOs also
posed some problems like ?
Each
	NGO had their own set of terminology used for several things ?
	like for Doorstep, the NGO teachers are known as Book Fairy (Pustak
	Pari), versus for Swadhar it is something different. The child
	evaluation scale for some NGOs are color codes, versus some other
	NGOs uses flower names as evaluation codes and a third variety is a
	simple scale of letter A to D
Each
	NGO had their own twists of READ program implementation ? like
	some were involved in home lending of books to schools while others
	were not. Some NGOs intervened through only primary standard classes
	in schools, while others were involved into pre-primary sections as
	well.
Data
	captured by NGOs differed
So,
all this led to providing several configurations in the system, so
that one solution, could cater needs of multiple NGOs
Tech
Stack –
We
decided to use
Django : Django was the choice for server development. It is stable, open source and has good i18n support. We used the DRF (Django Rest Framework) library for API development.
React JS : Since we expected to replicate some functionality in the app and website, we decided to develop the frontend using a web app technology rather than server-side rendering. We went with React for the frontend.
PostgreSQL
As
of today, the website part is mostly done, except the reports. The
metadata like NGO, school, class etc. capture by individual NGOs can
now start around the last week of April.
When this is happening at the NGO end, we plan to work on the reports, so that they can start using it from the coming academic year.
By Pradnya Baviskar
Soft Corner