Title: Call for Applications | fCxO Cohort H2, 2024
Author: Vinod Rajasekaran
Date: July 2024
Category: Fractional CxO
URL: https://projecttech4dev.org/call-for-applications-fcxo-cohort-h2-2024/
==================================================

Apply Now
Project Tech4Dev is excited to announce the launch of applications for the second half of 2024 of our Fractional CxO Program cohort. The program has been aimed at embedding seasoned technology professionals in NGOs for 3-9 months to help roadmap the organisation’s technology journey such that it is aligned with the overall organisation’s strategy.
While addressing the gap of the absence of a holistic tech strategy for the organisation, our learnings from working with NGOs over the past two years of the fCxO program include:
lack of capacity at NGOs for technical product and project management,
an increasing appetite within NGOs to incorporate new technologies such as AI/ML to leapfrog across current gaps such as knowledge dissemination to low literacy populations through voice conversations,
Drive towards evidence based interventions and hence data becoming an increasingly significant part of the technology strategy,
a need for fast, agile pilots that in the worst case fail fast which is not easily done by NGOs and software partners.
short term advisory and consulting needs on ongoing technology or data work
With this in mind, this new cohort will also incorporate a
Fractional Tech+Data
team that may include one or more of the following sub-teams
helmed by the Fractional CxO
:
A product/project manager who can work with internal teams and external stakeholders to deliver high-quality tech and data projects on time and within budget + scope
An advanced tech team that can address and solve short-term, high-priority problems, build proof of concept prototypes with internal and external teams that will include experience in one or more areas including engineering, data science, AI/ML and UI/UX.
As part of this we will also start considering very short term 20/40 hr technology and data consulting projects that are time and scope constrained. These could include critical software architecture and code reviews, focused data analyses, data or IT security audits etc.
A few testimonials below on the value this program has made to the organisations we have worked with along with some of the organisations we have worked with over the last two years:
If you are a non-profit or impact organisation looking to improve operational effectiveness or unlock the next level of impact through technology, fCTO program at Tech4Dev provides you the leadership talent to build your technology roadmap, build the requisite team for it and eventually build products that fit your mission?s impact needs. At the end of the program, we feel ready to absorb a full-time CTO and a full-fledged product team.?
Tarun Cherukuri, CEO, Indus Action
The Fractional CxO Program at Project Tech4Dev has enabled us to focus on the impact of our mission with the confidence of having a seasoned technology leader balancing immediate program requirements and long-term tech strategy and capacity needs. Every non-profit with a vision of aligning their use of technology to their strategic goals will benefit from the experience and expertise that the Fractional CxO Program provides.
Srinivas Krishnaswamy, CEO, Vasudha Foundation
How the Program Works
:
Once your NGO is selected, a seasoned technology professional will be assigned to work closely with your organisation. She/he will dedicate 12-16 hours per week to assist with various aspects of your tech transformation. Aspects worked on by a fCxO (each engagement is unique and will be shaped by each organisation?s needs and priorities) could include:
defining technology/data strategy and vision
streamlining engineering architectures and processes for already existing work
evaluating, selecting and working with  software partners
shaping raw data into insights using technology for collection, storage, processing, analysis, and visualisation.
assisting in capacity building efforts through recruitment and/or upskilling.
As mentioned above, short term needs might also be defined through the team concept but always helmed by the fCxO.
Expectations from NGOs / Our Selection Criteria
:
We ask that NGOs:
Have technology as one of their top 3 priorities
Can ensure active involvement of their CEO and senior leadership, especially in the initial month to set the direction and expectation for the rest of the team
Have a definitive organisational/program strategy and stable operational processes across the organisation
Have tech and data systems that are not in crisis; they are functioning, albeit with room for improvement.
Be willing to facilitate field visits as required by the fCxO
Application and Selection
:
To kickstart your journey, simply complete our application form, providing insights into your organisation?s technology and data needs, as well as your vision and plans. Tech4Dev will carefully assess all applications and select a handful of NGOs that align with our criteria. We will contact you within a week of filling out the application form to have a conversation and better understand your needs and timelines. We hope to be able to work with you to make a decision to do a go/no-go decision within four weeks of submitting the application.
Scale and Duration
Each fractional CxO typically works with 2 NGOs simultaneously, ensuring that their expertise benefits multiple organisations.  The engagement typically lasts for 3-9 months, offering sustained support and guidance.
Cost
Tech4Dev covers 1/3 of the program?s cost, while the remaining 2/3 is contributed by your NGO. The approximate cost for a half-time fCxO engagement (16 hours a week) is 1.27 lakhs per month.
Short term consulting models for definitive time and scope projects will be of the order of Rs 0.5 lakh (20 hours) and Rs. 1 lakh (40 hour engagements).
Fractional Tech and Data Team models will be highly dependent on the particular needs and assessed on a needs basis. A couple of samples to evaluate pricing:
Product Management:
For an engagement that involves product visioning, developing strategy and roadmaps, end user use case definition and product requirements ? fCxO (12 hrs a week) + Product Manager (12 hrs a week) : Approximately : 1.42L per month
MVP Prototype: For an engagement that involves creating a minimum viable prototype ? fCxO (8 hrs) + Product Manager (4 hrs) + Full stack developer (16 hrs): Approximately 1.49L
Note a fCxO engagement over 6 months can involve a fractional tech team engagement only over 2 months in which duration the fCxO time commitment will be lowered while other role resources help deliver.
We also offer substantial discounts to NGOs that share a common funder with Tech4Dev.
Work Location
Fractional CxOs work remotely but can travel for in-person meetings and field visits as and when needed and mutually agreed upon. Most fCxOs engagements typically involve a 3-5 day visit during the first two months of engagement to better understand the NGO not just from a technology perspective but a more holistic organisational perspective. We also plan for regular 1-2 day visits during the course of the engagement. Your NGO is responsible for covering the CxO?s travel and stay expenses.
Collaboration and Knowledge Sharing
Our embedded CxOs hold weekly check-ins internally at Tech4Dev to share insights and learning experiences, creating a collaborative environment. Tech4Dev leadership and fCxO team provides ongoing mentorship and support as needed. Fractional CxOs might also pull in another fCxO to assist in a specific tech or data scenario as they may be better equipped based on the expertise area.
Sampling of fCxO work:
Tech4Dev’s fCxO Program with Indus Action
Empowering SNEHA: Improving Effectiveness of Health Interventions through Data Democratization using Dalgo
Empowering Vision Care: Project Chashma?s Transformation with Avni Platform
Apply Now