Title: Nov partners’ meet: Highlights from days 2 & 3
Author: Kurund Jalmi
Date: November 2019
Category: Tech4Dev project Updates
URL: https://projecttech4dev.org/nov-partners-meet-highlights-from-days-2-3/
==================================================

The
Tech4Dev Partners? Meet was held over three days, from 10
th
Nov ? 12
th
Nov in Pune. Lumen was present on the second and the third day of the Meet and
also helped in facilitating a few sessions. The two days were a mixture of
discussions around the management of the Tech4Dev grant for NGOs as well as
over technological platforms for advancing the use and adoption of open source
solutions in the social sector.  Some of
the key discussion points are highlighted in this blogpost.
Cohort Management:
1. Learning from Cohort 1
The
group of software partners attending the Meet deliberated on what went well in
Cohort 1 and what could be improved for Cohort 2. Participants recounted
experiences in Cohort 1 on
Both, software partners and NGO
     partners, understanding each other?s work better. The importance of face-to-face meetings early in the
     project was highlighted, as well as the need for the software partner to
     visit the NGO?s field site and not just their head office so as to better
     understand the on-ground work.
Clarifying roles and
     responsibilities at the start of each project to avoid confusion on
     commitments and obligations later. Several NGOs are at a scale and stage
     of growth that are similar to those of a small business. Software partners therefore needed to account for
     the fact that there may not be a dedicated IT team at the NGO which is why
     the software partner would need to invest time in understanding the NGO?s
     processes, helping with the articulation of requirements, and providing
     the technical know-how to deploy a solution.
Communication and responsiveness
     throughout the project. Since technology
     is likely to be an enabler for an NGO, and not the core reason for its
     existence, it is important to recognize that the leadership of the NGO may
     be grappling with multiple priorities. The software partners shared
     practices on how to manage communication with a client so as to keep a
     project on track.
Software
partners also discussed how their experiences, even outside the Tech4Dev grant,
could be leveraged to improve management processes in Cohort 2.
2. Looking ahead to Cohort 2
Along
with the software partners, we also finalised all that was necessary for a
smooth cohort 2 management experience. This includes:
A Standard
operating procedure articulating best practices for managing cohort 2
All legal
documentation including relevant LOUs, contracts, and agreements between all
partners within the Tech4Dev initiative
Discussion
on financials ? necessity of refining a template that details the financials
During a webinar with the new
NGO grantees, the NGOs were given a clear view of the timelines and milestones
and some of the questions on LOUs and data management were answered.
The purpose of the webinar was to emphasize on the fact that it is
as important for the NGOs to own the project as for the software partners and
that though there is no grant money flowing from the NGO to the software
partner, both partners should consider the relationship as a client-vendor
relationship.
These steps taken for formalizing these documents are designed to work on areas of improvement articulated during feedback conversations with all NGO and software partners for cohort 1 and also to include other best practices in software development. Legal documentation makes the project concrete with clear timelines, milestones, deliverables, and responsibilities of all partners. This is expected to lead to a smoother project management experience.
Technology Platforms
:
Tech4Dev?s
vision is creating a movement for open source technology solutions for the
social sector so that there is minimization of similar solutions being created
repeatedly by different NGOs so that less money is spent on reinventing the
wheel and the NGOs can economically access similar solutions for addressing
their own challenges. This can happen through open source platforms that can be
easily and quickly customised for a variety of applications and uses.
1.
Discussions on data collection and grant management platforms:
Market sizing and research crucial
     before investing in development
UI/UX and perceived quality cannot
     be less than other commercially available solutions and users do care
     about these
Developing these open source
     platform solutions and pushing for more adoption within the social sector
     would be a core Tech4Dev focus area
All of these are important from the point of view of driving
adoption amongst NGOs and also for encouraging technology providers and
software companies currently not with Tech4Dev to take up these platforms for
their social sector clients. Considering that most software companies are
for-profit, it is also necessary to have a solid business case for them to take
up the platforms being built at Tech4Dev and these would help build such a case.
2.
NGOs may need to do a lot more in terms of using easily available solutions and
off-the-shelf alternatives before they get into customised solutions built for
them. This may help NGOs get the maximum benefit from simple and economical
solutions without the need for a big upfront investment into building something
purely customised for their needs. This would also encourage them to be more
disciplined and extract more out of existing data as process optimisation and
understanding of data are necessary prerequisites to technology deployment. Raj
Gilda, from LAHI, spoke on this.
3. Product marketing based on the technology adoption lifecycle can
be one approach to make easily deployable products out of open source solutions
developed within Tech4Dev.
The discussion
highlighted how many of the existing Tech4Dev software partners have a
background in services and stepping into a product mindset may be a new foray
for many.